Dead Dog

(Caption: A Smorgasbord of Strange)
The American pop group "They Might Be Giants" has discovered an opening in the music market: rock with humor.


As soon as a photographer is nearby, Their facial features slip into to mad grins and ugly scowls. They clothe their scrawny bodies in synthetic cardigans and polo shirts from the Wollworth table. In interviews, they like to talk about answering machine features and the effect hip hop has on dogs.
John Linnell, 32, and John Flansburgh, 31, don't dress like pop stars and don't talk like pop stars. Nevertheless, the two (who are starting a tour of Germany on April 21) sell out most venues, have their songs regularly top American charts, and the British journal "New Musical Express" eagerly awaits their newest record: "Will it move listeners to tears?"
Linnell and Flansburgh, the the two Johns from Lincoln, have been the comic heroes of the New York music scene under the name TMBG for a few years now. But these two seemingly harmless jokesters have taken the American music business by surprise: the possible Giants' debut record, released in 1986 by a small independent company, sold over 100,000 copies, and its successor Lincoln is even considered the best-selling record to ever appear on an independent label in the United States.
It's reason for the duo to switch to a larger record label and even indulge in mild megalomania. "We're not as big as the Rolling Stones yet," says Flansburgh, "but we're working on it."

TMBG, the product of two living cartoon stick figures who make fun of Rock'n'Roll as they Rock and Roll, didn't intitially attract critical acclaim. At home, in their shabby rented apartment in the New York district of Brooklyn, the slightly goggle-eyed Linnell and friend Flansburgh teetered between crude pop-rock structure, amateurishly intoned polka rhythms and alienated country sounds.
"Music was our last chance," recalls Linnell, "we both had absolutely hopeless jobs at the time: John worked in the shipping department of a publishing house and I developed photos."
The first record of this crazy art- and music-student duo immediately won over their critics. With lyrics like "everyone dies frustrated and sad, and that is beautiful" (from their single hit Don't Let's Start) and song titles like "I Hope That I Get Old Before I Die", a verbal twisting of The Who's classic "My Generation", Linnell and Flansburgh acquired the reputation of a couple of smart goobers.
While they soon added other musicians in the studio, the two rock comedians still play as a duo onstage: one on the guitar and the other on the tuba or accordion. The rest comes pre-recorded. Flansburgh's justification: "We have to concentrate on entertainment. Real musicians would only interfere."
Indeed, the performances of the "Marx Brothers of Pop" (Tempo) contain absurd excesses and triumphs of subtle nonsense: posing as naive amateurs, the two knuckleheads noodle with their instruments and fire off their often short, 90-second songs at a rapid pace. They insert swing sounds and salsa-hopping under lyrics of TV-babble or tell stories of dogs driven to suicide by the hip hop played by those darn neighborhood kids (Youth Culture Killed My Dog). "Snapshots of everyday American consciousness," Flansburgh and Linnell call their smorgasbord of oddities.
Because, as behind every comedic venture, there is a serious and enlightened awareness behind TMBG. According to the authors, the wild stage show, grimacing faces, and gruesome contortions are their caricature of the ridiculousness of the big music business: "We live in totally boring times," complains Flansburgh, "all superstars of the rock scene, the supposed trendsetters, make you want to kick their ass because they do their job so badly."

However, the success of the two Johns is based less on educational qualities than on their musical inventiveness. Apollo 18, the recently released fifth album by the gigantic duo, has 38 new gems. 17 are solid pop songs and 21 are variations of a "Fingertips" suite. "Every listener can make up their own song from it," Linnell proclaims, and when asked whether this could move listeners to tears, he added: "We tried it ourselves. There were no tears."