The interview date with the two Johns from Brooklyn was set for 6:15pm. As we arrive at the Modernes theater, a considerable number of oddly young fans have already gathered in front of the doors. There is a lot of activity in the foyer of the former porn cinema: sofas are carried to and fro, boxes and crates are cracked open, and merchandising kitsch is placed in suitable positons. Out of the chaos emerged their manager, leading us to backstage, while the boys finished with soundcheck.

John and John try straight beer and cheese plates while passing the time reading the writing and names on the wall. Anyone who has ever appeared at the Modernes has immortalized themselves here, but it's doubtful whether the SEX PISTOLS fit into that category. The interview was conducted by Stefan & Andreas, who were accompanied by Yvonne. Yvonne was supposed to take pictures, but the band didn't feel photogenic enough to pose for the camera.

GNG: How did you start?
JL:  We got to know each other in high school, where we worked together on some creative projects. In 1981 we moved to New York and started TMBG in 1983.
GNG:  How did you develop your style?
JL:  It was just the kind of music that we and our friends found interesting in high school. We weren't calculating, but did what we liked. We didn't really care whether that was hip or not.
GNG:  You play a whole bunch of instruments. How many, exactly?
JL:  Some. (laughs)
JF:  A hundred!
JL:  We just goof around on a lot of instruments. I started with various woodwind instruments and keyboards in high school. We're really just noisemakers. When we record an album, we try to get as many different sounds as possible.
GNG:  Is it still difficult to write songs or has it become a routine for you?
JL:  No, if you have a new idea for a song, you have to reinvent writing - you don't want to repeat yourself. It may even be more difficult. We didn't write as many songs as we used to, but the ones we're putting out now are all the more worth listening to.
GNG:  Do you think you belong to a scene, is there really such a thing as an "Indie" scene?
JL:  No, a lot of people are lumping a bunch of bands together, but I don't think we kind of fit into that whole scene musically. There are a lot of guitar-based bands out there and I don't feel too connected to them. And then some bands like REM easily fall out of this "scene" scene.
JF:  John doesn't believe in all that shrill screeching and whining.
JL:  No, I just don't like that stuff.
GNG:  What about the New York scene?
JL:  Well, (hello Andrew!) Sometimes I went to CBGB when they were playing Hardcore, they have these "Mad Nature Nights", Saturdays or Sundays and then only these hardcore bands play. At some point I had to go to CBGB to get an amp from backstage. It was in the middle of a hardcore festival and, well, I felt about 1000 years old.
GNG:  How old are you, anyway?
JL:  1000 years old, I just said that.
JF:  I'm 30 years old. 
JF:  When we moved to New York, it looked like there was going to be some kind of scene here, downtown, kind of an interesting experimental music scene, but we didn't end up being part of that. What messed up the scene so much was that a lot of people played in dozens of bands. LA Sharp played in pretty much every band.
GNG:  Do you think you're kind of hyped-up and people will forget you in a few years?
JL:  I think that's very easy to imagine. I've seen a bunch of bands that I found very good just vanish. I don't know if they were hyped here, but the good press simply didn't work anymore. But the people who bought your records will still think of you. (laughs)
GNG:  Your shows are considered to be very funny, so do you feel more like a musician or an entertainer?
JL:  We definitely feel like musicians and as musicians, we're already more successful than we could ever have imagined. As entertainers, we've already achieved, uh, well, the thing is, uh... ask another question.
GNG:  Do you have a plan for your shows or does it all come spontaneously?
JF:  Oh, we lay out the songs we want to play and that's it. It's not really a show.
JL:  We make a few jokes in between.
JF:  We just talk it up and try to warm up the crowd, but we don't try to become idols for the audience. We don't like things like "Hi, I'm Jesus and his twin brother Jesus!"
GNG:  So you're just two funny jokesters (like the interviewer)?
JF:  We are not funny and fun at all. We hate fun. We are normal people and we have the whole range of human emotions, we're not here for light entertainment. We take our work very seriously. But when you're onstage and have the creative control to present your songs as you want, you don't have to keep up the serious face the entire time. We let ourselves, without heroics, let some light in.
GNG:  Did you cry at ET?
JF:  I actually did cry when I saw ET, and I was very annoyed by that afterwards. I felt very exploited.
JL:  I didn't see ET, but my mother did, and she said the same thing.
JF:  I think it's very difficult not to cry at ET! You'd have to be totally cold-hearted not to. I have this problem with films where my eyes always start to well up, so I cry at films that are anything but sad.
JL: We saw Robocop and sobbed the entire time.
JF: The screen was so bright that tears were running down my face the whole movie. After watching The Breakfast Club everyone wanted to comfort me. (mimicking a comforting voice) "It's alright, John. You're no less of a man, just let it all out."
GNG: What is your biggest unfulfilled dream in the music business?
JF: Do we still have dreams that haven't come true?
JL: Because you talked about hype earlier: it would be nice if people weren't constantly trying to figure out why you were popular. If you're a new band, everyone just wants to know if you're the next big thing, everyone wants to discover you. We don't really want to be hip. We make our music and we don't care whether everyone in the world knows us or whether we attract the most viewers.
GNG: Do you agree with what people are saying, that Flood is more conventional than the other albums?
JL: There are some things that are different. Lincoln is edgier, scratchier.
JF: No, it's more. There's more noise on Flood. Like Hearing Aid, really rough.
JL: It's a different kind of rough. Flood may be a little lax. We recorded the album in a nice studio and we were less scared. But we're not particularly interested in being conventional, that's not something we worry about.
JF: May I ask something? The thing you have there, is that called an "Assman"?
GNG: Oh yes, the brand name on our dictation machine says Assman.
JF: We should buy one and show people at home, like "hey, the Germans don't have the Walkman, they have the Assman."
(That's sooo funny to Americans because the German word for "ace" means "ass" (Arsch) over there. GNG puts this translator's note because we don't print funny exchanges like that just for the joke to go over the German speakers' heads. Several incomprehensible ass jokes and guffawing follows.)
GNG: Okay, enough of that. You recently changed labels, before you were at Rough Trade. Other bands, like the Smiths, felt exploited and taken advantage of by RTD. Have you had similar experiences?
JL: RTD are extremely nice people and we never felt exploited. So far we have individually licensed our records and have never signed a contract for multiple records. RTD knew after the first album that we weren't going to stay with them forever. They released the record, later we asked if they wanted to release Lincoln, and they said, "Hmmm ... yes!" and that's all.
GNG: Could you tell us your favorite joke?
JL: We're really not very good at being professional jokers. I only know one: what has 8 arms and killed his girlfriend?
GNG: ???
JL: Squid Vicious!!!!
[TL note: the GNG translators have a sidebar to translate "squid" back into German.]
JL: But that's not a particularly good one, it's just the only one I can think of. I can only remember an obscene one...
JF: We know rather terrible, sick jokes.
GNG: This is exactly the magazine for that sort of thing.
JF: Yes, but we want to cheer you up.
GNG: Thanks, very kind. If a film was made about you, who would play your parts?
JL: Funny, we were just talking about that yesterday. Actually I wouldn't want to have a film made about me at all. You become more famous and have a certain reputation, good or bad, and then they make a film about you. I don't think that can bring you closer to the person. You can hear a thousand things about Liz Taylor, but you don't know whether she's a nice person or not. Some people you meet for five seconds and you're in a pretty shitty situation and you scream, "AAAARGH! I'm not doing this!!!", then that person will always think you're crazy and think you shout like that all the time. But I think we'll use Mr. MC Serch.
[TL note: The GNG translators don't know who this is and puzzle over it. "Surge? Sörrdsch"?]
JF: James Woods also looks like me, or Marlon Brando.
GNG: Could you tell us something about the creation of your videos?
JL: We work with the director Adam Bernstein. We discuss different ideas before we start, where to film, how, and what. Sometimes he comes up with ideas like, "Okay, guys, you're going to wear clown suits," and then we say, "NOOO FUCKIN WAAAAY!"
[TL note: NOOO FUCKIN WAAAAY appears untranslated.]
JF: And then we beat him up. That's how we make our videos.
GNG: How many people call your Dial-A-Song hotline every day?
JF: A few hundred or so, hard to say.
GNG: On one of your records, there's a recorded phone call. Who is the woman who is calling? (The TMBG hotline presents the duo's latest songs daily and can be called at any time. Said woman is loudly wondering on the phone what this nonsense is all about and why they'd be advertising something that you obviously can't make money with.)
JF: I don't know, it was a conference call, so she called someone and together they called our hotline. When the song was over, the beep came and the tape turned on. What you hear on the record is their reaction.
GNG: How has the tour been going so far?
JF: Oh, very good. We have been traveling since January and we were very lucky. England was exciting, we had a top ten hit and people were really excited to see us.
GNG: What is that photo on the Flood cover?
JL: It is a picture of a flood in Kentucky in the 1930s. People had to make their own boats because they weren't used to the water (true American logic...) and hardly had any boats. Actually, doesn't the Missisippi flow through Kentucky?
GNG: What are your predictions for the music of the 90s?
JL: Can't get worse ... The seventies were a million times better than the eighties. I'm a little afraid of all the shit that could be coming down the line.
(The manager enters the room, gesticulating wildly, and blows his whistle.)
GNG: What do you do when no one, not even him (pointing to the manager) is watching?
JL: Nothing....
JF: Eat, a lot. I hate to eat in public ... but now I'm really hungry!


The Modernes is packed. About 60% of the audience is between 14 and 18 years old, strange for a band that doesn't necessarily belong in the teen category, but maybe today's youth isn't completely lost after all. The in-house special effects expert briefly opens the roof to let out the smoke, and then John & John stumble onto the stage. For 60 minutes, the two entertain the cheering audience with their idiosyncratic songs. But the spark just doesn't seem to catch.
Even during the interview, the duo seemed stressed. Touring on a large scale seems to have taken its toll on them. John Flansbourgh remains stationary with his accordion, while John Lintell, strapped to his guitar, tries to inject some movement into the concert [sic]. Interrupted by brief announcements, the two play through their program. The minimal interaction with the audience seems mechanical and artificial, and even the occasional chuckle doesn't save the gig. A small, independent band has become a big name that easily fills larger concert halls, and the two New Yorkers don't seem particularly happy about it.
