LAUREL and HARDY

In four albums, the two weirdos of They Might Be Giants have made a place for themselves in the wacky little world of indie pop. With their jokes and their jumping melodies, they seem to have created an edifying saga of a certain America, popular and colorful, of which they have become the Pygmalions. In this world, with They Might Be Giants, if nothing is serious business, then everything is. Or the reverse.

>> In 1972, the film "They Might be Giants" was described as "a comedy both curious and eccentric, a satire of modern life expressing the need to retreat into fiction." Do you think that could be a good descritpion of your music?

(John Flansburgh, shorter and fatter) - Well, as a whole, I'll agree, but it's still a journalist's definition, which is to say sort of bunk. (laughs)

(John Linnell, taller and skinnier) - I don't agree...I hope that to the contrary, we're more real than a good number of rock groups. Rock in general can't help but cling to their attudes, their images, and stereotypes. Its traditional purpose is to offer an alternative to everyday life, to open a door to an imaginary world. Us, our music, our concerts, doesn't try to conform to this vision—in the theatrical sense—of rock. Onstage, we are so far away from the traditional imagery of what makes a rock star. We just look like we do in everyday life, like ordinary guys, the type of person you see on the street without a second thought...The music is also appreciated for itself, it takes center stage.


>> You don't have the impression that you're "curious and eccentric"?

(J.F.) Really, the more we try to be ourselves, the more people find us bizairre... Americans have very exacting ideas of what is normal and what isn't. Frankly, we're not looking for eccentricity. When we write a melody, we try to do the best we can to bring something, something that won't just be another drop in the ocean of pop music. (smiles)


>>  A good number of your songs, like "We're the Replacements", seem a lot like parodies...

(J.L.) I don't think that our songs can be qualified as parodies....If you have that impression, it's simply because a lot of our lyrics are simply moments of atmosphere, events that correspond exactly to our reality. So maybe the lyrics seem like parodies because they correspond to a reality that you only know through the song. There's no irony behind that, simply realism. Sorry to ruin any illusions you had.... (laughs)

(J.F.) "We're the Replacements" was written when I lived with a friend who never stopped playing their records. And there was such a simplicity to the way they spun their guitars that it made my whole day. I wrote that song to try to capture that spirit, that energy, not at all to make fun of them....

(J.L.) Our philosophy is much more positive than you're envisioning. Our goal, it isn't like Clash or the Plasmatics, to point fingers at all the stupid people around us. On the contrary, we want to search in the blackest most desperate places for the ray of sunshine that will make sense of the whole thing. What seems to be secondary we bring to the front... A song called "She's a Hotel Detective" could be interpreted a thousand ways, but it's only valid for what it is: a completely absurd nursery rhyme, almost idiotic. Our only goal is that when it's listened to, it makes you feel happier.

(J.F.) We've always been big fans of people like Gary Glitter or Jonathan Richman who had the genius to make the important things superficial. They're our role models.


>> How do you react when you read that They Might Be Giants is a punk group?

(J.F.) All right! Can I kiss whoever wrote that? (laughs) I'm really flattered.

(J.L.) I don't think that people think that in regards to our sound (smiles).... but instead, about the way that our songs are constructed. Basically, when you look at all the groups that qualify as punk, New York Dolls, Television, Clash, Sex Pistols, you realize that none of them look like each other. Punk is very interesting, it's a musical movement that gathers together very different groups who find themselves united by one thing: a musical structure that's very concentrated, very squared-off, very straight to the point. In a punk piece, all the notes have a very precise function, every sound is justified by its contribution to the overall structure. Contrary to appearances, songs by the Buzzcocks or The Clash have a very solid, rigid structure, and it's that, more than the volume at which they play, that gives it its power. That's the only sense in which They Might Be Giants qualifies as punk, only because we have the same dedication to coherence, precision in writing, in sticking to the essentials.

(J.F.) Despite all that, I think that a group like the Beatles has more influence on us than punk groups. It was because their songs rocked my childhood that I wanted to play in a band. And of course, it's obvious that without them we might never have dared to make such eclectic music. The Beatles were the first to venture into all the styles possible or imaginable. The White Album is a real jukebox all by itself, and I was always fascinated by its diversity. When the Beatles were in their psychedelic period, it wasn't following fashion, it was just a way of discovering new sources of inspiration. That's exactly the type of attitude behind our willingness to release "genre-defying" records. When you don't confine yourself to an a priori style, you give yourself infinite space to explore... By the way, what was the question again?

(J.L.) If you get John going on the Beatles, you can go out for a drink and come back and hour later and he won't even have noticed you left. (laughs)

(J.F.) (miffed) Very funny.


>> I believe that at one point you were hesitating between entering music or going into movies?

(J.F.) You know, I've also nearly become a mechanic, a librarian, gas station attendant, etc. So why not an actor...

(J.L.) (interrupting) Actually, what interested us wasn't entering showbiz at all costs, but simply to find a job that could be strong enough motivation to get us out of bed in the mornings. And you know, in the United States, movies aren't a mode of expression as much as a way of making money. If you're an American with even a little bit of creative inclinations, it never occurs to you to try to start a career in the movies. In the United States, we make movies like we sell socks. "Only business." I know that in France, it's not the same all, and movies are considered a form of art. That's the type of cinema that we would have been drawn to. If we had bought a camera before buying a guitar, we totally would have bought a ticket to Paris to make French films. Today, we would own a huge propery in Nice, I would have married Brigitte Bardot and we would have lots of kids... and two dogs.

(J.F.) (disgusted) Brigitte Bardot? But she's a hundred years old, at least!

(J.L.) (sincerely irritated) Yeah, you think?


>> You'd leave the United States in a heartbeat to come live in France?

(J.L.) No, I was just joking. You don't really think we'd ever come live with those savages the French, "those fucking snail eaters"... (laughs)


>> What triggered your move from being known by a circle of friends to getting a signature on a New York label?

(J.L.) That actually went very slowly. When we began under the name of They Might Be Giants, it was essentially because our good friends were pushing us to give concerts, to play for other people. At that time, our philosphy was that we shouldn't refuse any of the venues we were offered, regardless of the size of the rooms or the type of audience. In 1985, we did at least fifty concerts in every place imaginable. As it turns out, that's a pretty uncommon attitude in New York. In general, young local groups do a concert about every two months and try to get as many art directors as possible... No, we never made a single call to try to get record companies interested in our concerts. We really played for fun, and thanks to that, we gradually built a faithful following. But it took a long time.

(J.F.) I remember concerts where there were barely four or five people who were listening to us... That was really strange... And then, after a while, a guy from the Bar None label noticed us, and here we are.


>> Is New York still just starting out as the avant-garde artistic capital?

(J.L.) Actually, if you ask this question to anyone in the street, they'll almost definitely answer more or less yes. But it's more out of habit than anything else. New York isn't the center of the universe anymore. The best things of the United States come out of nowhere: Pere Ubu came from Cleveland, the Residents from Louisiana, etc. Apart from Sonic Youth and some others, New York is a dead city. While there are still certain groups of interest, they don't really form a "scene" anymore.


>> It's basically a very individualistic city. 

(J.F.) On the other hand, if we came to live in New York in '81, it wasn't because it was the most beautiful city in the world but because we also imagined that it was where everything started, where we could meet people who shared our vision of things. Since then, we've been very disappointed. (smiles)

(J.L.) I remember that at the beginning, New York really scared me. I lived, like John, in a little town in Massachusetts, and it took me a lot of time to get used to the giganticness of New York. But bit by bit, I took a liking to it. When you get to know the city better, you understand that it's just a series of villages, side by side. We regularly played at the bars of the East Village. The rooms were just the right size and the people there were very open, very interested in anything new...In fact, I think at the time, we were some of the most normal ones, the least bizairre... We often played with groups a hundred times more experimental than us. I remember in particular one who was able to empty the room in less than two minutes, they played so wrong.


>> When your wrote "Youth Culture Killed My Dog", what was your intention?

(J.F.) Oh, that's actually a true story. A few years ago, I had a dog named Iggy. He got his name from the fact that every time he heard "I Wanna Be Your Dog" by the Stooges, he'd get really bitey... One day, while I was shopping at the local supermarket with Iggy, the first measures of "I Wanna Be Your Dog" started playing over the shop loudspeaker, and Iggy immediately jumped onto a distraught woman. After that incident, I was forced to put him down. That's why I wrote that song, as an homage to my poor Iggy... (smiles)


>> That song is fairly typical of They Might be Giants, very tight, concise... Have you never looked to hire other musicians to expand your sound?

(J.L.) No way. I hate drummers.

(J.F.) The problem is that we can't stand the idea of having to lose time explaining to others what we want. It's hard enough already as two people.


>> "Apollo 18", your new album, seems less minimalist than before, better arranged...

(J.L.) It's normal that as we play more, our sound starts to progress a little. Since most of our songs are produced ourselves, over the course of our albums we've learned to create atmosphere by simply playing with mixing. It's the same principle as "Fingertips". In that song, you can hear about twenty melodies, each treated in a different way. It's sort of our way of showing that what counts isn't the sound, the way the song is arranged and produced, but the emotion it procures. Perhaps our technique gets better every album, but that doesn't mean that Apollo 18 is the very best They Might Be Giants record...


>> This album has a unity that was sometimes lacking before and bizarrely, that unity also seems to come from the fact that it is, on the whole, much more melancholy that previous records.

(J.L.) As you get older, you lose a bit of the positive energy of youth. And you compensate for that loss with a different search, more self-focused, and in a sense less superficial...If this album is more unified, it's because it's more reflective. I think that our first album was also very melancholy in spirit, but the multiplicity of the forms it came in gave it a more smiling, carefree appearance. Nowadays, we have greater control over the form than in the past, so the songs are much closer to us and therefore less direct.

(J.F.) As for that, I have a scoop: Our next album won't just be melancholy, but totally depressing. It's titled "The Return of the Living Dead, Volume 8" and will be sponsored by the National Undertaker's Union. Also, we're going to change our band name. Henceforth, we shall be known as They Might Be Dead...