THEY MIGHT BE GIANTS...but their songs pack too much information into too short a time.

But they didn't know that the Coolies were known in Europe, and in general, the inventors of Dial-A-Song met us with such warmth and understanding that SPEX readers could believe that the ironic subjunctive of Their band name will become indicative in the near future. But first, an interview with fellow fan of melody Detlef Diederichsen.

JOHN FLANSBURGH BEGINS with the band's short biography:
John (Linnell) was born in New York, I was born in Boston, and both of us grew up in Lincoln, Massachusetts. Five years ago in NYC we founded our band. The first gig was at a "Sandinista Rally" in front of fifty real Sandinistas, average age 45, on the third anniversary of the revolution in Central Park. We were playing in front of a big FSLN banner, and nobody spoke any English. We thought a benefit concert was the nicest way to start. Then we didn't play for about a year. Finally, we started to play in lousy clubs in New York, and in November '86, our LP came out in teh States. We made a video that wasn't sent to MTV and then went on a European tour.


>>How do you collaborate, by exchanging tapes?

Linnell: Yes, something like that. Usually one of us comes to recording sessions with a song idea already recorded, and then the other one reacts, shakes his head or starts crying, or singing, or hugs the other guy...

Flansburgh: We'll send the four-track recording to our producer Bill Krauss in the eight-track studio. We usually only need four tracks, but we mix them there and pretty them up with sound effects and reverb. Then they're ready for our Dial-A-Song service, where you can hear a different song every day over the phone. We've got about fifty songs in rotation.


>>Live, you concentrate pretty much on the fun side, while the record also contains some melancholy songs.

Flansburgh: Yeah, we've gotten to test out our songs pretty well by now, and we know what's going to land and what won't. On the other hand, we have songs like "Hide Away Folk Family", which is rather melancholic, but with a fun crowd-participation part (where they ask the audience to "scream as if you're in hell".)


>>What is Hide Away Folk Family about?

Flansburgh: In a way, it's about fear, but in a fairly abstract way. What you're afraid of isn't really identified. It's kind of a something-bad-is-going-to-happen-but-you-don't-know-what yet. Folk songs usually have a story, but we left out the story in this one, leaving only the atmosphere.


>>So Hide Away Folk Family isn't based off of any particular people.

Flansburgh: To tell the truth: I stole the title. One of our friends did a performance titled "Freedom", where she puts a Barbie doll's head on top of hers so that she looks like a two-meter Barbie doll, and in an interview she was asked to give the titles of her future hits. One of them was "Hide Away Folk Family". I asked her for permission to use the title, she said "no", and then I wrote the song.


>>Your favorite pasttime seems to be making fun of pop, youth culture, and all of its byproducts, as if you weren't part of it yourself.

Linnell: Well, we do make records, perform in clubs, and in that way we're the same as everyone else...

Flansburgh: But it's because in order for us to get into the clubs where we play, we have to perform there. If you're not famous, people just think you're weird.


>>How does the normal American pulic react, when they see you making fun of Rock & Roll? Are they angry?

Linnell: Not when we're performing. After all, that's what Rock & Roll is all about, dismantling Western culture. That's actually a very simple thing, anyone could do that. But that's not our main goal. Not only do we want to dismantle, we also want to heal and stretch boundaries.


>>But you destroy rock rituals.

Flansburgh: Not exclusively, sometimes we celebrate them too.

Linnell: Or we re-invent ancient rituals from fifty years ago to make fun of them.


>>As you've picked the melodic pop song back up again, which is pretty much out of fashion.

Linnell: Well, we both love a good melody. If it wasn't out of style, we'd still write the songs the same way.


>>But ten or twenty years ago, your tunes would be safe chart-toppers.

Flansburgh: Exactly. And I think there's still hope, because generally, when you write a song with a good melody people will always like it.


>>But today people are completely undemanding and happy with any shitty tune. And since then, the carefully-composed, Beatles-like melody has become an underground love affair.

Flansburgh: Right. Maybe we should care more about our appearance.


>>Above all, there's a good beat in your songs, a good groove.

Flansburgh: That wouldn't be wrong. Groove is good!


>>Are you a sixties band?

Linnell: Only partially. As much as we are a fifites or a fourties band.

Flansburgh: We definitely aren't a seventies band. But we are even more of an eighties band.


>>Sure, because modern electronics play a pretty important role in your music.

Flansburgh: True. We hear a lot of hiphop—you can't avoid it in New York—and that has also influenced our music. Not in a way that we're rapping or writing similar lyrics, or even just imitating their beats, but structurally: what we're doing, in a sense, is a concrete art-music way of assembling songs. Hiphop is definitely the best modern music currently available.

Linnell: There's another aspect to hiphop that really excited us when we first came to New York: it's music, but for the recording studio specifically; it doesn't stand for some live band. There are sounds that go straight from the chips[?] to the tape. It doesn't try to be "real". It's fully aware of its "fakeness". It was always the same with us. Our music was always pure home recording music. Even though we now perform live, most of it comes from the tape, so it remains "fake".


>>Your recorded music and your live shows don't really fit together. The music is one thing, the show something completely different. Both have their unique qualities, but I think they depend on each other.

Linnell: Well, I do think that music should be performed...

Flansburgh: They're sort of mutually exclusive. Our music can't be played "properly" live. The music doesn't let us to do everything that we want to do onstage. I always liked the idea that a record is recorded to be played publicly, that people can dance to a record, without the help of a live band. I think home discotheques are a great idea, but unfortunately disco music is usually so terribly bad. There should be places where people can enjoy recorded music, not just dance music, that's meant for public playback. That would be ideal for us.


>>Isn't it strange that you've now gone on an old-fashioned Rock & Roll tour, with all the usual accoutrements?

Linnell: A little bit, but with us it's a bit different. There's just two of us, we don't use drugs... The rock and roll lifestyle, honestly, isn't very romantic...

Flansburgh: For us anways, but maybe for the Swans.

Linnell: How come?

Flansburgh: Because after the concerts all the people with black hair go to their dressing room, and then there's a class party....

Linnell: Oh, the social side.

Flansburgh: For us, at 30, that's over.

Linnell: Well, the Swans are in their 40s.


>>Have you ever thought about putting together a band to stop having to use tapes?

Flansburgh: We already tried that, but it didn't go very well. The lyrics weren't as clear, and you're no longer quite in control of what's going on. You can't just tell your bassist and drummer that they don't play on the next two songs. Having a band adds too much momentum.


>>Do you want to get rich and famous?

Linnell: If we did we probably would have given up music for a proper job.

Flansburgh: I think we have to stick with it at this point. We have to get really big now.

Linnell: The thing is, the jobs we had before were absolutely hopeless. We had to shoot high with the music, or we'd end up landing there.


>>What kind of jobs did you have?

Linnell: John worked in the mailing department of a publishing house and I worked in a photo lab. Both are jobs where you can't really get ahead.


>>Can you imagine yourselves landing a hit?

Flansburgh: For sure!

Linnell: Of course! But it would be totally bizairre. It would be, like, a UFO.

Flansburgh: It would be great. It would be interesting. In every sense...


>>But don't you think that your lyrics, at least, don't fit in with the top 40?

Flansburgh: But there's room for things that are just "good". Punk bands also place on the charts, without having to fit in with the rest.


>>But Punk was a completely new style, a movement, it was the new thing...

Flansburgh: There are hundreds of bands that are like us.


>>Really?


Flansburgh: I don't know. Maybe they're all waiting in Brooklyn to take Germany by storm. No idea. But I could imagine that. That said, Laurie Anderson also had her hit. On the other hand, I don't like the possibility that in ten years people might think we're yuppies or assholes. I don't rmember who said that "One night I went to bed and David Byrne was the coolest guy in the world, and when I woke up he was an asshole."

Linnell: One of the Butthole Surfers said that.

Flansburgh: Well, that's exactly how it was. And it happened after the Talking Heads had been successful for some time. It doesn't matter. Of course, we aren't like the Talking Heads, but if we keep working like this, the radio stations will eventually take notice.


>>I'm afraid your songs pack too much information into too short a time for a chart hit.

Flansburgh: Maybe.


>>And it's common for underground bands to have to change their music to sell a lot of records.

Flansburgh: But the big difference is that our music is already so melodic from the start. I think that at the end of the day you can do pretty much anything you want, if the song is melodically pleasing. It has something in common with all the unpleasant stuff on the charts.


>>But at least from the record companies' perspective, your music has so many chord changes, and oblique rhythms....

Flansburgh: Our songs are actually very simple.


>>But not so much that it's satisfied an A&R manager.

Linnell: No, maybe it's just too many chords for them.

Flansburgh: Maybe two. But even with "Bad", for example, the melody is so complicated that you can't hum along with it. Here in Germany, we already are played from time to time on the radio. Probably because it's state-controlled...


>>What kind of music do you like to listen to? What do you feel connected to?

Linnell: That's two questions. I don't listen to a lot. I have a horrible record player and actually only ever play a stack of 78's that I bought at flea markets. But that doesn't mean those have anything to do with our music. John, I think, listens to a lot of radio...

Flansburgh: Yes, I listen to the radio a lot. But I think that our music is primarily influenced by things that we see in New York. For example, there's a band called The Spandex Jackets that make very unusual music. But they haven't made a record yet...


>>How about the dB's?

Flansburgh: Oh yeah! Fantastic band. I don't know their latest stuff, but the first two LPs were outstanding. Just like the Feelies. The first LP - brilliant! What they did afterwards I don't follow anymore.

Linnell: There are lots of very good bands in the United States that nobody's ever heard of. Sometimes we get to know some, if we both play at a local event. There's The Coolies, for example, which play exclusively Paul Simon songs...


>>That one's also known in Germany.

Linnell: Really? Nobody's heard of them in New York.

Flansburgh: An incredible band. Their stage show is so amazing. I think they're the best live band I have ever heard.

Linnell: We've played concerts together with them in the South...

Flansburgh: ...and they totally played us into the wall. They're so cool! It's incredible! People who hear their record think they're a hardcore band, but they aren't at all. They play Paul Simon songs with a kind of post-modern rock aesthetic. And the guitarist is just unbelievably good.


>>What about Camper van Beethoven?

Linnell: They are good. Strangely, we're often compared to them ....

Flansburgh: ...when they're so huge and amorphous, and we're so small and precise. You can never understand their lyrics, there's always such an element of primal noise to them. They're from the West coast, we're from the East coast, and of course they're hippies.


>>But like you, they don't quite fit into an existing style.

Flansburgh: Right. But we don't really worry about that. We are desperate to be understood. We want to know what we can do to make sense to the listener. It's very rare that we perform without people reacting and showing that, somehow, they are getting what we mean. We don't want to be some fucked-up art project that just shocks and alienates people.