
2/8/21
-------
I dreamed Rob Cantor came out as a trans woman. "This makes perfect sense," I thought in the dream. "I always knew she was going to be trans, it was obvious."

I was very confused upon waking up.


2/2/21
-------
I dreamed I was reading an article about Tally Hall that made no sense. "kinda problematic how they talked about the Japanese when EVERYONE knows how they were treated in WWII :/" it said, but also kept calling Zubin "Mohammed" as though it legitimately thought that was his name.

"What the hell is wrong with the person who wrote this article?" I said out loud, but nobody cared.


10/4/20
--------
I dreamed that my friend Eddie and I attended a Rob Cantor solo show. There wasn't any music, it was a sort of comedy and magic/illusion show.

Rob was dressed as a magician, and a short old Chinese woman with a deck of strange cards was his assistant. Most of his jokes were strange, without a logical punchline, like a T.H.I.S. bit. Sometimes he came down off the stage and into our small audience, and we followed him around the theater as he did his bit.

There was a bed and some other random furniture onstage. At the end of the show, Rob thanked everyone and climbed into the bed fully clothed. Eddie got excited and climbed onto the end of the bed to ask him questions, which he answered graciously.

I was distracted by his alarm clock. It had a little ascii animation of a squirrel running around in circles.


9/15/20
--------
I dreamed that I met Andrew Horowitz. He was nice but also clearly having a mental breakdown, so talking to him was a little difficult because he didn't make any sense.
He was writing a waltz but insisted in doing it in C code.

He was very agitated and kept hugging me in a nervous way but calmed down enough to be less worrying when I convinced him to help decorate the house with props for a Halloween party.


8/13/20
--------
I dreamed that I found a twitter account that was VERY OBVIOUSLY Joe Hawley's but trying very hard to pretend to be a random internet kid. The recent tweets were all very HOW DO YOU DO FELLOW KIDS? but scrolling back far enough, it was obviously joe-type dream journal stuff.

I suddenly got a DM from the account. Due to dream logic, I could literally see Joe typing the message to me, wearing a baseball hat backwards like an adult pretending to be a kid in a DARE skit. But even when I furiously told him I could see him, he wouldn't admit who he was.


7/14/20
--------
I dreamed that an enormous NoFace style monster had trapped a bunch of people, including me and the Tally Hall guys, in a huge mansion. Anyone who tried to escape would be psychically dragged back or possessed.

I escaped with Joe Hawley, but as we were getting away, his phone rang and I realized it was the monster trying to trap him. He answered it before I could stop him and became possessed, and I had to physically drag him the last several feet out of the monster's influence.

The dream then "cut" to a scene of me as Andrew hanging out with Zubin. We had also escaped and were hiding in an apartment, wondering how we might be able to free Rob next.


10/20/19
--------
I dreamed that Tally Hall was stranded on a spaceship  that was running low on resources. Music was playing somewhere, but when they tried to pause it, it just kept going.

Confused, they traced it back to a pile of junk in the back of the spaceship. Joe Hawley was sitting under the pile of junk trying in vain to cover his mouth, but the music was coming from him like his head was a speaker. We realized we would have to clean up to make him stop.

I was annoyed, because I felt like Joe was doing this on purpose to make me do work, but eventually he opened his mouth and I could see that his tongue was torn and bleeding from the vibrations of the song coming out of his head. I immediately stopped complaining.



